README.md, before:

# Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive Tasks

## Background
- Large pre-trained language models (LLMs) encode vast amounts of factual knowledge within their parameters.  
- **The challenge:** While they excel at many NLP tasks, LLMs have inherent limitations:  
  - Knowledge is static and difficult to update or correct  
  - Cannot reliably cite sources or provide provenance  
  - Susceptible to generating hallucinations  
- **The solution:** Augment LLMs with non-parametric memory by retrieving relevant documents, combining the model’s parametric knowledge with up-to-date external information.


### Previous Work
- REALM and ORQA: Encoder-based models for open-domain extractive QA.  

## Overview
### **RAG: Retrieval Augmented Generation**
- **RAG extends this hybrid parametric + non-parametric memory setup to sequence2seq encoder-decoder models.**
- RAG models take an input sequence, use it to retrieve text documents, and then uses the input and retrieved text documents as context to generate an output sequence.


### Main Components

- **Retriever:** $p_{\eta}(z \mid x)$  
  - Returns top-K text passages $z$ given the input query $x$  
  - Based on Dense Passage Retrieval (DPR)
  - Uses a bi-encoder setup:  
    - $q(x)$: Query representation encoded by a BERT-based query encoder  
    - $d(z)$: Document representation encoded by a BERT-based document encoder
      - Builds the document index, which stores dense vector embeddings of all passages
  - Documents are ranked using Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) to find the most relevant passages.  

- **Generator:** $p_{\theta}(y_i \mid x, z, y_{1:i-1})$  
  - Generates each next token $y_i$ based on:  
    - The input query $x$  
    - The retrieved document $z$  
    - All previously generated tokens $y_{1:i-1}$  
  - Implemented using BART-large, a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) transformer.  


### Variable Definitions

| Symbol | Meaning |
|:-------|:---------|
| $x$ | Input query or question |
| $z$ | Retrieved document or passage |
| $y$ | Target output sequence |
| $y_i$ | Token generated at step *i* |
| $y_{1:i-1}$ | Sequence of all tokens generated before step *i* |
| $\eta$ | Retriever parameters |
| $\theta$ | Generator parameters |


---

## RAG Variants

### 1. RAG-Sequence
- Uses **the same retrieved document** to generate the entire output sequence. Once a document is selected, the model conditions the full output on that document.  
- Marginalizes over the top-K retrieved documents to account for retrieval uncertainty, so the overall probability of generating a sequence is:  

$$
p(y \mid x) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-K}} p_{\eta}(z \mid x) \, p_{\theta}(y \mid x, z)
$$

- Suitable when a **single document contains most of the required information**, but may be less flexible if multiple sources are needed.

---

### 2. RAG-Token
- Allows **different documents to influence each token** in the output. For each token, the model marginalizes across the top-K documents to compute the probability of the next token.  
- Captures fine-grained information from multiple sources, making it more robust when no single document fully answers the query.  
- The probability for each token is:

$$
p(y_i \mid x, y_{1:i-1}) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-K}} p_{\eta}(z \mid x) \, p_{\theta}(y_i \mid x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

- Ideal for tasks where **information is scattered across multiple passages**, but computationally more expensive than RAG-Sequence.

---

## RAG Algorithm Pseudocode

### Algorithm 1: Retriever
**Dense Passage Retriever (DPR) component**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, query sequence  
**Output:** $\tilde{z} \in (V^{\*})^K$, top-K retrieved documents  
**Output:** $p_\eta \in \mathbb{R}^K$, retrieval probabilities  
**Parameters:** $\eta$ consisting of $\text{BERT}_q$ parameters for query encoder and $\text{BERT}_d$ parameters for document encoder (frozen)  
**Hyperparameters:** $K \in \mathbb{N}$, number of documents to retrieve  
**External:** $D$, document index with precomputed embeddings

1. $q \leftarrow \text{BERT}_q(x)$
2. **for** $i \in [|D|]$: $s[i] \leftarrow d[i]^T q$
3. $\tilde{z}, \text{indices} \leftarrow \text{top-K}(s, D)$
4. $p_\eta \leftarrow \text{softmax}(s[\text{indices}])$
5. **return** $\tilde{z}, p_\eta$

**Where:**
- $q$: query embedding
- $d[i]$: precomputed document embedding for document $i$
- $s[i]$: similarity score between query and document $i$

---

### Algorithm 2: Generator
**BART-based sequence generator**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Input:** $z \in V^{\*}$, retrieved document  
**Input:** $y_{1:i-1} \in V^{\*}$, previous tokens  
**Output:** $p_\theta \in \Delta(V)$, probability distribution over next token  
**Parameters:** $\theta$, BART generator parameters

1. $c \leftarrow \text{concatenate}(x, z)$
2. $p_\theta \leftarrow \text{BART}(c, y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
3. **return** $p_\theta$

**Where:**
- $c$: concatenated context (input sequence and retrieved document)

---

### Algorithm 3: RAG-Sequence
**RAG-Sequence: same document for entire sequence**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Output:** $p \in \Delta(V^{\*})$, probability over output sequences

1. $\tilde{z}, p_\eta \leftarrow \text{Retriever}(x \mid \eta, D)$
2. **for** $k \in [K]$:
   1. $p_k \leftarrow 1$
   2. **for** $i \in [N]$:
      1. $p_{\theta,i} \leftarrow \text{Generator}(x, \tilde{z}[k], y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
      2. $p_k \leftarrow p_k \cdot p_{\theta,i}[y_i]$
3. **return** $p = \sum_{k=1}^K p_\eta[k] \cdot p_k$

**Where:**
- $N$: length of output sequence $y$
- $p_k$: probability of generating sequence $y$ using document $k$
- $p_{\theta,i}$: probability distribution over tokens at position $i$

**Mathematical formulation:**

$$
p_{\text{RAG-Sequence}}(y|x) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-k}(p(\cdot|x), Z)} p_\eta(z|x) \prod_{i=1}^N p_\theta(y_i|x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

---

### Algorithm 4: RAG-Token
**RAG-Token: different document per token**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Output:** $p \in \Delta(V^{\*})$, probability over output sequences

1. $\tilde{z}, p_\eta \leftarrow \text{Retriever}(x \mid \eta, D)$
2. $p \leftarrow 1$
3. **for** $i \in [N]$:
   1. $p_i \leftarrow 0$
   2. **for** $k \in [K]$:
      1. $p_{\theta,i,k} \leftarrow \text{Generator}(x, \tilde{z}[k], y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
      2. $p_i \leftarrow p_i + p_\eta[k] \cdot p_{\theta,i,k}[y_i]$
   3. $p \leftarrow p \cdot p_i$
4. **return** $p$

**Where:**
- $N$: length of output sequence $y$
- $p_i$: marginalized probability of token $y_i$ over all documents
- $p_{\theta,i,k}$: probability distribution over tokens at position $i$ using document $k$

**Mathematical formulation:**

$$
p_{\text{RAG-Token}}(y|x) = \prod_{i=1}^N \sum_{z \in \text{top-k}(p(\cdot|x), Z)} p_\eta(z|x) \; p_\theta(y_i|x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

---

<details>
<summary>If you were tasked with building a RAG chatbot that is used for troubleshooting technical issues in a cloud infrastructure platform (like AWS or Azure), would you use RAG-Sequence or RAG-Token?</summary>

Because each step of a troubleshooting answer might depend on different documentation sources — such as error codes, CLI commands, or configuration guides — RAG-Token’s token-level retrieval lets the model dynamically pull the most relevant technical details as it generates the response.
</details>


---

## Critical Analysis

### What the Paper Did Well

**Comprehensive Evaluation**: The paper tested RAG across diverse tasks (open-domain QA, abstractive QA, question generation, fact verification) rather than optimizing for a single benchmark, demonstrating broad applicability.

**Systematic Comparisons**: The experiments clearly show where performance gains come from - learned retrieval adds ~3 points over frozen retrieval, and dense retrieval (DPR) outperforms keyword matching (BM25) by 12+ points on Natural Questions.

**Human Evaluation**: Beyond automatic metrics, they conducted human assessments showing RAG was more factual than BART in 42.7% of cases vs. 7.1%, with concrete evidence of reduced hallucinations.

### Key Limitations

**Retrieval Quality Dependency**
- RAG's performance is fundamentally bounded by retrieval quality - experiments show 12-point drops when swapping DPR for BM25 (44.0 → 31.8 EM on Natural Questions)
- No fallback mechanisms for detecting or handling retrieval failures
- Paper acknowledges "retrieval collapse" where the model learns to retrieve identical documents regardless of input, but doesn't solve it

**Limited Exploration of Components**
- All experiments use single knowledge source (Wikipedia December 2018) and primarily one retrieval method (DPR), with only BM25 as baseline
- Generator fixed to BART-large - no exploration of other seq2seq models or scaling effects
- Document chunking is arbitrary (100 words) with no analysis of semantic boundaries

**Conflicting Information Handling**
- Paper doesn't explore how RAG resolves contradictions when retrieved documents having conflicting information
- No mechanism to flag contradictory evidence to users
- For FEVER, 10% of questions lack gold documents in top-10 retrievals, but impact isn't analyzed

**Missing Computational Analysis**
- RAG-Token requires K generator calls per token (500 calls vs. 10 for RAG-Sequence in typical case)
- No latency benchmarks or discussion of deployment costs (100GB CPU memory for index)

--- 

<details>
<summary> If you had to improve RAG's performance with limited resources, which component would you focus on — retrieval or generation — and why?</summary>

You should  focus on improving the retrieval component.  
RAG’s overall performance depends heavily on the quality and relevance of retrieved documents — even a strong generator can’t produce good answers from weak or irrelevant context.  
Enhancing retrieval through better indexing, document chunking, or embedding quality often yields the greatest performance gains with limited resources, since it directly improves the grounding information the generator uses.
</details>


---

## Impact

- **Novel Hybrid Architecture:** First end-to-end system combining learned retrieval with seq2seq generation, using both parametric (model weights) and non-parametric (retrieved documents) memory.  
- **Strong Results:** Achieved state-of-the-art performance on open-domain QA benchmarks like Natural Questions (44.5 EM), TriviaQA (56.8 EM), and WebQuestions (45.2 EM), with fewer parameters than models like T5-11B.  
- **Knowledge Updating Without Retraining:** Demonstrated "index hot-swapping" — knowledge can be updated by replacing the document index; e.g., 70% accuracy on world leaders with correct indices vs 4-12% with mismatched indices.  
- **Reduced Hallucinations & Interpretability:** Grounded generation in retrieved documents leads to more factual, specific outputs and provides visible sources.  
- **Learned Retrieval Without Supervision:** End-to-end training treats retrieval as a latent variable, requiring no annotated retrieval data.  
- **Foundation for Modern AI:** Inspired retrieval-augmented systems like ChatGPT with browsing, Perplexity AI, and enterprise RAG solutions; set the standard for hybrid parametric/non-parametric models.

--- 

## Citation

Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., … Kiela, D. (2021). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401 


## Other Resources

- https://github.com/NirDiamant/RAG_Techniques/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file
- https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/nlp/retrieval-augmented-generation-rag-for-knowledge-intensive-nlp-tasks/#

Commit message:

Refine critical analysis in README.md
Revised sections on evaluation and limitations for clarity and conciseness.

README.md, after:

# Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive Tasks

## Background
- Large pre-trained language models (LLMs) encode vast amounts of factual knowledge within their parameters.  
- **The challenge:** While they excel at many NLP tasks, LLMs have inherent limitations:  
  - Knowledge is static and difficult to update or correct  
  - Cannot reliably cite sources or provide provenance  
  - Susceptible to generating hallucinations  
- **The solution:** Augment LLMs with non-parametric memory by retrieving relevant documents, combining the model’s parametric knowledge with up-to-date external information.


### Previous Work
- REALM and ORQA: Encoder-based models for open-domain extractive QA.  

## Overview
### **RAG: Retrieval Augmented Generation**
- **RAG extends this hybrid parametric + non-parametric memory setup to sequence2seq encoder-decoder models.**
- RAG models take an input sequence, use it to retrieve text documents, and then uses the input and retrieved text documents as context to generate an output sequence.


### Main Components

- **Retriever:** $p_{\eta}(z \mid x)$  
  - Returns top-K text passages $z$ given the input query $x$  
  - Based on Dense Passage Retrieval (DPR)
  - Uses a bi-encoder setup:  
    - $q(x)$: Query representation encoded by a BERT-based query encoder  
    - $d(z)$: Document representation encoded by a BERT-based document encoder
      - Builds the document index, which stores dense vector embeddings of all passages
  - Documents are ranked using Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) to find the most relevant passages.  

- **Generator:** $p_{\theta}(y_i \mid x, z, y_{1:i-1})$  
  - Generates each next token $y_i$ based on:  
    - The input query $x$  
    - The retrieved document $z$  
    - All previously generated tokens $y_{1:i-1}$  
  - Implemented using BART-large, a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) transformer.  


### Variable Definitions

| Symbol | Meaning |
|:-------|:---------|
| $x$ | Input query or question |
| $z$ | Retrieved document or passage |
| $y$ | Target output sequence |
| $y_i$ | Token generated at step *i* |
| $y_{1:i-1}$ | Sequence of all tokens generated before step *i* |
| $\eta$ | Retriever parameters |
| $\theta$ | Generator parameters |


---

## RAG Variants

### 1. RAG-Sequence
- Uses **the same retrieved document** to generate the entire output sequence. Once a document is selected, the model conditions the full output on that document.  
- Marginalizes over the top-K retrieved documents to account for retrieval uncertainty, so the overall probability of generating a sequence is:  

$$
p(y \mid x) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-K}} p_{\eta}(z \mid x) \, p_{\theta}(y \mid x, z)
$$

- Suitable when a **single document contains most of the required information**, but may be less flexible if multiple sources are needed.

---

### 2. RAG-Token
- Allows **different documents to influence each token** in the output. For each token, the model marginalizes across the top-K documents to compute the probability of the next token.  
- Captures fine-grained information from multiple sources, making it more robust when no single document fully answers the query.  
- The probability for each token is:

$$
p(y_i \mid x, y_{1:i-1}) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-K}} p_{\eta}(z \mid x) \, p_{\theta}(y_i \mid x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

- Ideal for tasks where **information is scattered across multiple passages**, but computationally more expensive than RAG-Sequence.

---

## RAG Algorithm Pseudocode

### Algorithm 1: Retriever
**Dense Passage Retriever (DPR) component**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, query sequence  
**Output:** $\tilde{z} \in (V^{\*})^K$, top-K retrieved documents  
**Output:** $p_\eta \in \mathbb{R}^K$, retrieval probabilities  
**Parameters:** $\eta$ consisting of $\text{BERT}_q$ parameters for query encoder and $\text{BERT}_d$ parameters for document encoder (frozen)  
**Hyperparameters:** $K \in \mathbb{N}$, number of documents to retrieve  
**External:** $D$, document index with precomputed embeddings

1. $q \leftarrow \text{BERT}_q(x)$
2. **for** $i \in [|D|]$: $s[i] \leftarrow d[i]^T q$
3. $\tilde{z}, \text{indices} \leftarrow \text{top-K}(s, D)$
4. $p_\eta \leftarrow \text{softmax}(s[\text{indices}])$
5. **return** $\tilde{z}, p_\eta$

**Where:**
- $q$: query embedding
- $d[i]$: precomputed document embedding for document $i$
- $s[i]$: similarity score between query and document $i$

---

### Algorithm 2: Generator
**BART-based sequence generator**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Input:** $z \in V^{\*}$, retrieved document  
**Input:** $y_{1:i-1} \in V^{\*}$, previous tokens  
**Output:** $p_\theta \in \Delta(V)$, probability distribution over next token  
**Parameters:** $\theta$, BART generator parameters

1. $c \leftarrow \text{concatenate}(x, z)$
2. $p_\theta \leftarrow \text{BART}(c, y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
3. **return** $p_\theta$

**Where:**
- $c$: concatenated context (input sequence and retrieved document)

---

### Algorithm 3: RAG-Sequence
**RAG-Sequence: same document for entire sequence**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Output:** $p \in \Delta(V^{\*})$, probability over output sequences

1. $\tilde{z}, p_\eta \leftarrow \text{Retriever}(x \mid \eta, D)$
2. **for** $k \in [K]$:
   1. $p_k \leftarrow 1$
   2. **for** $i \in [N]$:
      1. $p_{\theta,i} \leftarrow \text{Generator}(x, \tilde{z}[k], y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
      2. $p_k \leftarrow p_k \cdot p_{\theta,i}[y_i]$
3. **return** $p = \sum_{k=1}^K p_\eta[k] \cdot p_k$

**Where:**
- $N$: length of output sequence $y$
- $p_k$: probability of generating sequence $y$ using document $k$
- $p_{\theta,i}$: probability distribution over tokens at position $i$

**Mathematical formulation:**

$$
p_{\text{RAG-Sequence}}(y|x) = \sum_{z \in \text{top-k}(p(\cdot|x), Z)} p_\eta(z|x) \prod_{i=1}^N p_\theta(y_i|x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

---

### Algorithm 4: RAG-Token
**RAG-Token: different document per token**

**Input:** $x \in V^{\*}$, input sequence  
**Output:** $p \in \Delta(V^{\*})$, probability over output sequences

1. $\tilde{z}, p_\eta \leftarrow \text{Retriever}(x \mid \eta, D)$
2. $p \leftarrow 1$
3. **for** $i \in [N]$:
   1. $p_i \leftarrow 0$
   2. **for** $k \in [K]$:
      1. $p_{\theta,i,k} \leftarrow \text{Generator}(x, \tilde{z}[k], y_{1:i-1} \mid \theta)$
      2. $p_i \leftarrow p_i + p_\eta[k] \cdot p_{\theta,i,k}[y_i]$
   3. $p \leftarrow p \cdot p_i$
4. **return** $p$

**Where:**
- $N$: length of output sequence $y$
- $p_i$: marginalized probability of token $y_i$ over all documents
- $p_{\theta,i,k}$: probability distribution over tokens at position $i$ using document $k$

**Mathematical formulation:**

$$
p_{\text{RAG-Token}}(y|x) = \prod_{i=1}^N \sum_{z \in \text{top-k}(p(\cdot|x), Z)} p_\eta(z|x) \; p_\theta(y_i|x, z, y_{1:i-1})
$$

---

<details>
<summary>If you were tasked with building a RAG chatbot that is used for troubleshooting technical issues in a cloud infrastructure platform (like AWS or Azure), would you use RAG-Sequence or RAG-Token?</summary>

Because each step of a troubleshooting answer might depend on different documentation sources — such as error codes, CLI commands, or configuration guides — RAG-Token’s token-level retrieval lets the model dynamically pull the most relevant technical details as it generates the response.
</details>


---

## Critical Analysis

### What the Paper Did Well

- **Comprehensive Evaluation:** The paper tested RAG across diverse tasks (open-domain QA, abstractive QA, question generation, fact verification), demonstrating broad applicability rather than optimizing for a single benchmark.  
- **Human Evaluation:** Conducted human assessments showing RAG was more factual than BART in 42.7% of cases vs. 7.1%, with concrete evidence of reduced hallucinations.  
- **Explored Retrieval Settings:** The paper experimented with different numbers of retrieved documents during training and testing, showing that performance is robust across configurations and can improve when more documents are retrieved at test time.

### Key Limitations

- **Retrieval Quality Dependency:** RAG's performance is fundamentally bounded by retrieval quality. Experiments show a 12-point drop when swapping DPR for BM25 (44.0 → 31.8 EM on Natural Questions). No fallback mechanisms are provided for handling retrieval failures.  

- **Limited Exploration of Components:** All experiments use a single knowledge source (Wikipedia, December 2018), which may not always be reliable or complete. The generator also is fixed to BART-large, with no exploration of other seq2seq models or scaling effects.  

- **Conflicting Information Handling:** The paper does not explore how RAG resolves contradictions when retrieved documents contain conflicting information, and there is no mechanism to flag contradictory evidence to users.  

--- 

<details>
<summary> If you had to improve RAG's performance with limited resources, which component would you focus on — retrieval or generation — and why?</summary>

You should  focus on improving the retrieval component.  
RAG’s overall performance depends heavily on the quality and relevance of retrieved documents — even a strong generator can’t produce good answers from weak or irrelevant context.  
Enhancing retrieval through better indexing, document chunking, or embedding quality often yields the greatest performance gains with limited resources, since it directly improves the grounding information the generator uses.
</details>


---

## Impact

- **Novel Hybrid Architecture:** First end-to-end system combining learned retrieval with seq2seq generation, using both parametric (model weights) and non-parametric (retrieved documents) memory.  
- **Strong Results:** Achieved state-of-the-art performance on open-domain QA benchmarks like Natural Questions (44.5 EM), TriviaQA (56.8 EM), and WebQuestions (45.2 EM), with fewer parameters than models like T5-11B.  
- **Knowledge Updating Without Retraining:** Demonstrated "index hot-swapping" — knowledge can be updated by replacing the document index; e.g., 70% accuracy on world leaders with correct indices vs 4-12% with mismatched indices.  
- **Reduced Hallucinations & Interpretability:** Grounded generation in retrieved documents leads to more factual, specific outputs and provides visible sources.  
- **Learned Retrieval Without Supervision:** End-to-end training treats retrieval as a latent variable, requiring no annotated retrieval data.  
- **Foundation for Modern AI:** Inspired retrieval-augmented systems like ChatGPT with browsing, Perplexity AI, and enterprise RAG solutions; set the standard for hybrid parametric/non-parametric models.

--- 

## Citation

Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., … Kiela, D. (2021). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401 


## Other Resources

- https://github.com/NirDiamant/RAG_Techniques/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file
- https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/nlp/retrieval-augmented-generation-rag-for-knowledge-intensive-nlp-tasks/#
